{:title  "Delivering Software is an Ultra-Marathon; not a Series of Dashes"
 :layout :post
 :date   "2018-08-10"
 :tags   ["management" "software" "running"]
 :draft? true}

The following tweet from Grady Brooch surfaced on my timeline today:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-lang="en"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Indeed.<br><br>Delivering quality software that matters is an ultra marathon, not a series of 100 yard dashes. <a href="https://t.co/R6N1VWPOgs">https://t.co/R6N1VWPOgs</a></p>&mdash; Grady Booch (@Grady_Booch) <a href="https://twitter.com/Grady_Booch/status/1027643000724312065?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">August 9, 2018</a></blockquote>
<script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

As an ultra-runner and software creator myself I couldn't agree more and believe
that the paralell deserves a deeper dive.

## It's a time-consuming afair

Ultra-running and building software products are increadibly similar activities
in many aspects. For one, ultra-marathons are very time-consuming
endeavours. The longest time I've engaged in a continuous event was 56
hours. Building useful, quality software also takes time.

The most basic mistake an inexperienced ultra-runner can make is go out too
fast. Every single ultra-runner out there has made this mistake at least once.
You feel simply great when you are at the start line. Your legs are fresh and
you are ready to go. Very often the day is beautiful, the temperature is perfect
and the adrenaline is high. Your family and friends might be there giving
support. Running out too fast for the distance is far too easy.

Running out too fast will make you burn down at some point. A common lingo
around ultra-runners is "what's your 50-mile pace?" or "what about your 100-mile
pace?" Knowing how fast you have to run at mile 1 of a 100-miler is crucial in
order to cross the finish line.

We often incur in a similar issue when building software. The team is energized;
business is optimistic about the results. Often we will have the chance of
experimenting with new technology or restructure some of the old stuff that has
plagued us for years. We go all in without internalizing how long we'll have to
"run" to complete this "race". How many times you reach Sprint 4 just to realize
you are close to a burn out? How many times you realize that those botched out
patches you've cobbled up together in the first sprint or so are now a big
technical debt that the whole team depends on? You can rationalize that it made
sense to rush some of those things then and it's Ok to do so but the problem is
not going to go away by itself.

## Solving problems sooner rather than later

Similarly to ultra-running, it's important to react to problems as soon as they
surface. If your technical debt will just get bigger and bigger without action,
you'll need to slow down, negoatiate some extra time and fix it as soon as
possible.

As ultra-runners we have to do that all the time. Sometimes you are
too fast for the temperature or your stomach isn't happy with the stress you are
putting it through. There's no way to deal with most problems without slowing
down and remediating the situation - even if it means not achieving your time
targets.

## Prepare the sprints

In ultra-running you just don't get out there and run. The distance between aid
stations is often 10 miles or more. Most races try to have an aid station every
2 to 6 hours. The longest I've been without reaching any aid was 20 hours. When
I reach a station I know what I need to prepare for the next section, what I
need to restock, as well as if and how my strategy needs to change. I usually
also have a short summary of what the next session has in store for me. How many
miles, the elevation profile, the terrain type - anything that can get me ready
for the next stint. Very often I spend considerable amount of mental energy
preparing for those aid stations before reaching them.

Unexperienced ultra-runners not only fail to prepare in advance but also leave
the aid stations without enough supply or information. If you don't have enough
water for the 4+ hours you will be out there, things will get very bad at some
point. If you carry a clunky water bottle for a section that requires intense
climbing, you will regret every second of it.

I have been in quite too many software projects where developers have very
little idea of what the sprint will look like once the sprint has already
started! Stories are inexistent or poorly written. No prior work in grooming or
preparation for the sprint has been made.

Do make sure you know what you will need once you are "out there" and make sure
you have access to all the resources before heading back out.

## Sprint timeline vs product timeline

Ultra-runners often say "run the mile you are in" or "you just need to run to
the next aid station." We use such expression when things are so hard that the
very thought of how many miles we still have to go puts us down. In software
development sprints pretty much capture this mindset. We "just" need to deliver
this sprint.

These are great mind tricks with excellent short-term results but with one
caveat: if, in practice, you only run this one mile, the other 99 miles that
make the race won't be run at all. If you only complete this one feature in
this one sprint, the other 199 features that make this software won't be
delivered at all.

That's why it's very important to keep the longer term objective in the back of
your mind. Running this mile will be hard - and there will be 99 more hard miles
to run after this one. Completing this sprint will be a challenge - and then
there will be 9 more untill launch. My developers know that I always ask them
two questions "which sprint are you in?" and "how many sprints you have left?"
You need to hold those two in mind at the same time.

## Experience is a big indicator of success (the race is just the last X miles)

## Predictability helps

## You will need support (can't usually do it alone)

## It's not entertaining as shorter events



Non similarities

you can deliver SW often
single vs team
everyone is running
family and friends vs no one
